Here we have our familiar 2link robot in the
configuration where Q2 is greater than 0.
And over laid on that is the robot with the
same end effector position but Q2 is now less
than 0. These are the two possible solutions
for this robot in order to achieve this particular
endpoint pose. We might be interested in how
the robot moves from one configuration to
the other. It's an interesting motion for
the robot because the end point position is
exactly the same but the joint angles Q1 and
Q2 need to follow some interesting trajectory
to move from the first configuration to the second.
Here's a more vivid example in three dimensions.
This shows a PUMA 560 robot moving to grab
a ball. Now we can see that the robot is making
that grasp in either the left hand configuration
or the right handed configuration. We might
ask the question, "How does the robot move
from a left handed configuration to a right
handed configuration? How do we compute the
trajectory that allows that to happen?"
Once again we're going to define a model for
our PUMA 560 robot. Load that into the workspace.
We have the robot object. Say here. The workspace
variable p560. I'm going to define a pose
that I'd like my robot to adopt. And let's
give him by this homogeneous transformation
matrix here. I'm going to define a new workspace
variable that represents the set of join angles
required by the robot to adopt this particular
pose in the left handed configuration. I use
the ikine6s method, pass in the homogeneous
transformation representing the desired pose
and the switch L to indicate the robot is
to be in a left handed configuration and this
is the required set of joint angles. I can
do the same thing for a right handed configuration.
I'm going to create a new workspace for a
variable called QR.
Let's have a look at these particular robot
configurations. I can plot the configuration
QL. And it looks like this in stick figure
representation. Let me look at that from a
different vantage point. And it looks like
this for the right handed configuration. Now
getting a little bit ahead of ourselves, what
I'm going to do is to create a trajectory
and show the robot moving from the configuration
where all those joint angles are equal to
0 to the left handed pose. It's going to do
that in 50 time steps.
Now the result of the jtraj function and we'll
talk more about this later in the lecture
is a matrix with 50 rows and 6 columns. Each
row corresponds to particular time step. Row
1 is the first point of the trajectory. Row
50 is the last point of the trajectory. Each
column represents a particular joint angle.
Now the robotic tool box can easily deal with
trajectories. So I plot but instead of a particular
joint angle I plot a trajectory. We see the
robot now moving from 0 angle configuration
to a left handed configuration.
I can change this two, move from the 0 angle configuration
to the right handed configuration, and once
again I can plot that. See the robot doing
a quite convoluted looking motion. Finally
what I can do is show the robot moving from
the left handed configuration to the right
handed configuration.
And this is an interesting motion because
the robot starts and ends the trajectory with
its end effector in exactly the same pose.
But in between the robot is going to go through
some contortions in order to change from being
a left handed robot to a right handed robot.
Compute the trajectory and then we're going
to have a look at that. Interesting to see
what the robot does here. You can see that
the motion is quite complex and the end effector ends
up just where it started. Sometimes in a manufacturing
scenario, the robot does exactly need to change
from being left handed to being right handed.
Perhaps it needs to access objects at the
extreme ends of its workspace and needs to
change configuration.
So these configuration change motions, there
is no net over all the motion of the robot
but while it's doing the configuration change,
there can be some quite wild and exciting
joint motions. You need to be a little bit
careful when you command such a motion that
the robot is not going to collide with anything
in its workspace.